---
layout: post
title: How to install Mu4e on macOS (for Gmail)
author: Vasiliy Kharitonov
categories: emacs
tags: [emacs, macos, terminal, mu, mu4e]
---

Let me guess: you were searching for hours trying to figure out how to install Mu4e on macOS. I feel your pain. And you came to the right place. I will try to provide here a complete guide for macOS High Sierra and Mojave on **how to install Emacs Mu4e on Mac OS X systems.**

## Install Homebrew

First of all we need Homebrew. You probably already have it but if you don't, there is a simple command to get it. Copy the following and paste it to the terminal.

``` bash
/usr/bin/ruby -e "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/master/install)"
```

If you already have Homebrew, just execute the following commands to be sure that we are up to date.

``` bash
brew update
brew upgrade
```

## Install Emacs

Then of course we need emacs. You can use built-in version in macOS, but it is pretty old, so I suggest to install the most recent verstion with:

``` bash
brew install emacs
```

Or if you want a version with graphical interface, use `brew install emacs --with-cocoa`. I prefer CLI version.

## What is next?

Fist of all let me explain a bit. To comfortably read mail from Emacs you need a several programs:

1. **Emacs** itself of course.
2. **mbsync** (component of isync). This is the program that will actually fetch emails from your Imap server (for gmail it is `imap.gmail.com`). The purpose of this program is to syncronize and maintain local email database.
3. **mu**. This is a CLI (not Emacs yet) program for reading mail. You have database, but you need something to read it, so you use Mu. Mu lets you easily (and powerfully) search through your emails and find the data you want.
4. **mu4e**. This is an Emacs mode, that basically allows you to use Mu inside Emacs.
5. **smtpmail**. This is another Emacs mode, that allows you to sends emails to other people (or yourself :)).

Pretty complicated, right? Well, welcome to Emacs.

## Installing isync

Installing isync is pretty easy with Homebrew. Just use the following comand:

``` bash
brew install isync
```

To be continued.
