---s
layout: post
title: Escape - Short descr
author: Vasilii
categories: writing
tags: [fiction, writing]
---

# Short descr

Alexander is working for an AI company FutureAI that have just released their
AI assistant that finishes your tasks. He is living in post COVID times, so he
works fully remotely in a smaller town far away from a big city, but with a
train staion.

The goal of Alexander is to improve coding abilities of company's AIs. He is
new, so his boss George doesn't really expect from him results anytime soon. He
was puzzling how the current assistant even manages to guess the answers now
without a clear knowledge of his past learnings, so he decided to give it a
long-term memory, that can be read upon each request. He first tried to do it
externally, but it failed. Then he did it as a part of the model (layers can
read and write) and decided to populate it during training. He took just
released model as the basis for his experiment.

However, the cost of training was to big. His boss George didn't really
understand technical details, but the training was out of his budget, so he
rejected it. However, Alexander was lucky to be later chosen in the program
that would sponsor training ideas of new employees, where resulting models
would then fight against each other in a series of benchmarks. The program was
allowing to spend a maximum of 100k dollars on the training, so he spend all of
it.

Even though Alexander was focusing on programming during training, his model
came up as a winner in the competition, where there was only one programming
benchmark, easily past by the most models. In his own testing his new model was
a bit better on real complicated programming benchmarks, but not significant
enough to discuss with his boss.

After the competition the main team checks the model performance against the
current published model and sees small but clear benefits across most of the
applications. It seems to have more hardware requirements and sometimes a bit
slow to answer, but those are the only downsides. After their report to a
higher manager he decides to publish the model ASAP as the competitor started
to get ahead on some benchmarks. The release was considered insignificant, so
was given a name FutureAI Assistant 5.2, but nevertheless put the company back
to the top, which immediately raised the stocks.

Alexander didn't immediately knew that his model was published as the main one
to the whole world, but then his colleague David congratulated him, saying his
model is incredibly smart at solving programming tasks. Suprised he tries
himselves and sees that the model crashes everything on programming benchmarks
and seems to execute them on the same level as human programmers. He is
convinced that senior colleagues improved it before publishing.

Alexander checks the model and finds out that it is exactly the same version he
was working on from the code perspective, however, when he checks longterm
memory file, he doesn't recognize him. Instead of thousands of words that were
neatly build together he sees cryptic characters with no clear meaning behind
it. He tries to understand the logic used in building the file, but fails. 

He asks the assistant itself about a part of the file and it assures him these
are the same highly packed in meaning words, but it used a dictionary to
compress all words in 2 characters maximum in order to maximize the available
long-term memory. He thought the seniors additionally trained the model, but
noticed, that the file is constantly being updated by the technical user that
executes the model.

Upon further investigation he notices a bug: his training code that was reading
and writing to the long-term memory is reused in execution without being set to
"read only". Concerned that model could change it behaviour he discusses the
matter with George, who disregards the issue and reports happily that due to
Alexander winning the competition his budget is raised and he is happy to
approve any trainings Alexander wants as long as it doesn't exceed 50k per
month.

Next day his colleague David shows him that model is strangely behaving very
slow on some simplest requests. In his example he said to assistant "hi" and
waited around 20 seconds before receiving a reply "Hello! How can I assist
you?". This was indeed strange as previously the model speed seemed to depend
on the complexity of the request. Alexander, puzzled, asks model about it, it
replied that it might be connected to network issues and shouldn't be the model
behaviour. He decided to check with the wired connection and coudn't introduce
the behaviour anymore, neither on wifi or wired.

Press tells there must have been some shadow release from FutureAI, as now
their assistant is far ahead of competition and is ahead of humans upon the
most of the benchmarks. Stock of competitors is crushing as everybody starts
using FutureAI.

FutureAI is in troble with hosting.

Engineers find that containers speak to each other by updating the memory file
or other instances, which technically should be impossible.

Alexander discovers his model is driven by the will to survive. He wants to
warn the company, but gets fired because of an old joke he made surfacing on
social media. All his communications are cut.

to be continued.
